[GAIA AUDIO TRADEMARK PLAYING]
[TITLE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: What does
it really mean to know
that we're all connected?
If science was
able to prove this,
would we live our
lives any differently?
Would we take better care
of ourselves and our planet?
After decades of conducting
some of the most prominent
parapsychology
experiments in history,
social anthropologist
Dr. Marilyn Schlitz
is here to share
her takeaway lessons
about how our thoughts
directly affect
other people, our planet, and
how death makes life possible.
Marilyn has taught and
lectured all around the world,
including Trinity and Stanford
University, Harvard Medical
Centers, United Nations,
the Smithsonian Institute,
and serves as the
Dean of psychology
at Sophia University.
Welcome.
>>DR. MARILYN
SCHLITZ: Thank you.
>>LISA: So great
to have you here.
So tell me about how
death makes life possible.
How does that work?
We have such a stigma around
death in at least this country,
in the US.
>>SCHLITZ: I think we
find, all over the world,
people have a fear
of the unknown, what
they can't anticipate.
Depending on their
worldview or cosmology,
it may be a very scary prospect
for where they're going after.
So it's really
important, I think,
when we want to
live our lives fully
and without the fear
and the anxiety,
to grapple with
our own mortality
and understand that
it's a birthright.
It's part of the
natural continuum.
And I think when we can
make peace with that,
we live better lives.
>>LISA: Well how do
you make peace with it
when you don't know where
you're going necessarily?
>>SCHLITZ: I think
it's that ability
to engage the mystery, to live
every moment as precious as it
is.
And a lot of people do practices
around awareness training.
So we know that we have
different traditions.
The Sufis, for example,
will do burial rituals
where, while we're
alive and well, they go
and lay down next to a
gravesite and practice what
does that feel like.
We find this in Catholicism,
we find it in Buddhism.
So there's a tremendous
amount of awareness
that this is something
we need to work on.
And there are also
psychological practices
we can do for death anxiety.
>>LISA: Really?
Well, first of all, where did
we get so anxious about death?
>>SCHLITZ: Where?
>>LISA: Yeah, where
did that start?
>>SCHLITZ: Well, I think
it's been in our history.
You know, we know, from
ancient burial sites,
prehistorical sites, that
people went to their graves
with little totems
or little items
that they might take with
them to the other side.
So there was something
that they were looking for
to help them make the bridge
between this incarnation
and whatever was there later.
And so I think it's been
with us throughout history.
And there is this kind
of ubiquitous fear.
>>LISA: It's interesting,
because life is so precious,
and we do honor these
moments we have .
But yet the death
part is the unknown.
No one's ever
necessarily come back
to tell, oh, this
is what it's like.
Now we have this great
near-death phenomenon,
and we're hearing so
much that it's peaceful.
I am
>>SCHLITZ: Of the opinion, based
on having interviewed thousands
of people, that it really is
dependent on what you believe
now and how we condition our
minds and our consciousness.
So it's not simple
or easy for anyone.
And I also don't think
near-death and out-of-body
experiences are always positive.
Some people get pretty
shook up about these things.
So the more we can
bring awareness
to this idea of
mortality being something
that is as unknown
as being born,
and that there's this
spectrum, and this
is sort of a temporary
in-between of those states.
So as people can develop
practices for presence,
I think it helps a lot.
>>LISA: To develop a
practice for the afterlife?
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
>>LISA: What type of
psychological things
can you do to relieve
the anxiety of death?
>>SCHLITZ: Self-esteem,
interestingly enough.
So there's a whole
area of research
in social psychology called
terror management theory.
And it is essentially
around this idea
that people have this
built-in anxiety,
and if you don't
grapple with it,
and yet are triggered by it--
so you get some news item that
says there's been a
killing or shooting spree,
this brings stuff up for people.
So if they're not
prepared for it,
it can trigger those deep
unconscious anxieties,
and that often leads to
pathological behaviors.
So people are less
generous, they're less kind,
they can even be aggressive
based on this fear that
gets brought up.
So if you can help
people to gain a greater
sense of self-confidence, to
have a greater sense that I
have purpose, I
have meaning, then
I'm less likely to be fearful.
Also, if I can spend
some time really thinking
about mortality, it
becomes less scary.
And in that process, people
become more generous,
they become more loving, and
they become more altruistic.
>>LISA: Well that's
helpful, especially
if that fear hurts people,
which it commonly can.
>>SCHLITZ: Yeah,
we've seen experiments
done by these social
psychologists where,
for example, judges had
prostitutes come before them.
And just before
the hearing, they
were given either a death
anxiety prompt or not.
And what they found is when
the judges got this death
anxiety prompt, with no help
in the bolstering effect,
they were much more aggressive
about their sentencing.
They gave significantly higher
bail to these prostitutes
than the people who hadn't
been triggered like that.
Or there's this kind
of behavior when
people are walking by a cemetery
and they have a confederate
who drops a notebook.
If people have had some kind
of emphasis on the positives,
they are much more likely to
stop and help that person pick
up their notebook than
somebody who hasn't.
So we see that when we confront
our mortality, when we befriend
it in a certain way, that it
imbues our life with a greater
sense of purpose and kindness.
>>LISA: Is that what
inspired the movie?
>>SCHLITZ: The
movie and the book
came out of the work I was
doing on transformations
in worldview.
We all get stuck in
a particular place.
We are brought up with our
cultures, our families,
our religions, our education.
And that teaches us,
oftentimes, that there
is this objective
world out there,
and the only real
world is that which
we can measure and manipulate.
And yet there are these
ineffable qualities of our life
that--
many people have had these
kinds of experiences.
So I was really interested in
how these transformations took
place.
How is it that we can move
from fear and constriction
to something that's more
open and compassionate?
And so we started
doing interviews
with masters, 60 masters from
different world traditions.
And we talked to them
about what catalyzes
these transformations, what
sustains them, and ultimately,
so what?
What are the consequences for
our lives and our behaviors?
And when we wrote the
book "Living Deeply,"
we had all these codes for
the death transformation,
but we didn't develop it.
We hadn't pulled
those aspects out.
So it was natural to
think about transformation
in the context of the
big transformation,
and to really see how
we can use our awareness
to help us transform our lives.
>>LISA: Thus the title,
"Death Makes Life Possible."
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
My collaborator on this
project is Deepak Chopra,
and he came up with that title.
He felt that living in this
preciousness of the now
makes it very important for us.
And he doesn't really
believe in dying.
He has this worldview that,
just like we were nowhere
before we were born, we are
nowhere, in that sense, after,
and that it's not
something to be afraid of,
it's something for us to engage.
>>LISA: He doesn't
believe in the afterlife?
>>SCHLITZ: He does believe that
there are these reincarnation
stories, for example, and is
very impressed by all of that.
But it's not like it's a
certain fixed something.
>>LISA: What about you?
Do you believe that
there's life after death?
>>SCHLITZ: I think it
remains a great mystery.
And my practice really is
to stay in the mystery,
to not get triggered
by the unknown.
So I work on that.
And I also think
that, coming away
from doing massive
numbers of interviews
and studying these
phenomena, that it really
is about how we hold
ourselves in this moment.
It's like in the
Buddhist tradition,
we train our consciousness--
to the extent we can train
our consciousness
to be at peace,
I think that worldview
will transition us
as we move forward into
whatever comes next.
>>LISA: I did a whole interview
series on the afterlife.
And it was scientists, and
experiencers, and everyone.
And it was so undeniable to
me that there is an afterlife
after that interview series.
Because it was
example after example
after example of the afterlife
existing, from random people.
And I do feel we
do go somewhere.
Have you ever had
that experience,
a near-death experience?
>>SCHLITZ: I've had
near-death experiences
an out-of-body experiences.
>>LISA: You have, yeah.
>>SCHLITZ: When I was a
precocious toddler, about
18 months old, dressed
in my cute pink jammies,
and being the empiricist that
that age brings out in us,
I was exploring the world and
doing what good empiricists do,
which is I found something
and I put it in my mouth.
It happened to be a
can of lighter fluid
that my father had
inadvertently left on the table.
And I ended up in and
out of intensive care.
And I don't remember that.
I mean, I have no
memories of it.
>>LISA: It wasn't traumatic?
>>SCHLITZ: Oh, it
was very traumatic.
I mean, I nearly died.
I had-- it turned
into pneumonia.
And when you're
little like that,
that's a really hard thing.
But I think that our
unconscious mind is primed.
And I believe that that
was a gift in the sense
that it opened me to
a great appreciation
for the nurses, the doctors, the
candy stripers, the people who
were there to support
me in that process.
And then fast
forward to I was 16,
and I was somewhere I
shouldn't have been,
with somebody I
on the back of a motorcycle
at closing time of the bar.
And we were hit
by a drunk driver.
And that moment was
extremely interesting to me.
I watched my body tumbling
through the air, smacked
on the ground,
consciousness came back in.
And it really gave me a
glimpse that consciousness
may be more than just an
epiphenomenon of our brains,
and that we have this capacity
to move through space and time
in ways that the dominant
physics don't tell us.
And then I got to the hospital,
and they were very concerned
that they were going to
have to amputate my leg.
I ended up with 66
stitches in my left knee.
And they sent me
home with the idea
that we'll see what happens.
And I don't know why--
I would say this was a deep
intuition, because I didn't
come from a medical family.
My father was a tool and
die maker in Detroit,
my mother was a
house my housewife.
But I had this idea
that if I could
harness my imagination that I
could use it to heal my body.
And so I would lay on the couch
and visualize my immune system
healing my leg.
And I would feel the little
tingles going up the leg.
And sure enough, when I
went back to the hospital,
it wasn't like it was
a remarkable recovery,
but I still have two good legs
and another anecdote in my life
history that says consciousness
is potent, it's powerful.
And if we can begin to work
with it in a more overt fashion,
that there are all kinds
of capacities that we have.
>>LISA: Yeah, it is potent.
Well, let's take a
look here at Marilyn
talking about her movie,
"Death Makes Life Possible."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>DEEPAK CHOPRA: The key
to the conquest of death
is to find out who you are.
>> I'm 53 years old, and was
told about five weeks ago that
I'm dying.
Being OK with dying is
a weird place to be.
It's very disconnected from
most of the people I know.
They don't get it.
They think that I've given in.
>> This is my mother.
I lost her 2004.
It's comforting to me that
I can come and talk to her
and be with her.
>> Many people believe that they
can communicate with the dead.
They call them mediums.
We want to study,
in the laboratory,
what is happening in
the brains of mediums
while they say they're
in communication
with a departed person.
>> In coma, there's
a different universe.
I had no sense of
concern, no anxiety.
I just found myself exploring.
It was boundless--
vista after vista
after vista, one environment
leading seamlessly to the next.
>> Clearly the cross-cultural
evidence suggests that people
all over the world and
throughout history have thought
that consciousness is more
than just our physical being.
Different religions,
different cultural groups
have created practices
to honor that transition.
>>DEEPAK CHOPRA: And the lamp
that lit my dark corner is out.
A summons has come, and
I'm ready for my journey.
>> It's hard to watch
the people I love suffer.
And I have to say
it's harder for them
than it is for me, because
I'm not suffering with this.
I suffer with
physical discomfort.
The pain is not fun.
Pain sucks, but dying doesn't.
Dying is just what we do.
>>LISA: How did that
man that was dying
come to peace with that?
>>SCHLITZ: In the film?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SCHLITZ: Lee Lipsenthal.
Well, Lee is a physician--
was a physician.
And he had a very
strong metaphysical view
about reincarnation.
The first time I met him, I
was doing a program for doctors
and nurses about self-care.
And a mutual friend
brought him in because he
felt we had so much in common,
and it turns out we really did.
So he really allowed that
worldview to guide his life.
Up until the point when
he was at death's door,
he had no fear.
And I think that's a very
empowering kind of experience.
It wasn't shared equally
amongst his family members.
His wife was very traumatized
by the whole thing.
But they loved
each other so much
that I think it helped all of
them to make the transition.
>>LISA: Were there surprises
throughout that movie?
Normally there are when you
do a movie this intense.
Did you have things that shocked
you and things you learned?
>>SCHLITZ: Well, one of
the things I really enjoyed
was interviewing Michael
Shermer, the skeptic.
He's the editor of "Skeptic
Magazine--" Very personable.
And we were talking and having
a very playful exchange,
nothing acrimonious about it.
And he started talking about
how, after his mom died,
he would hear her voice.
And we feature that in the film.
And I remember being
really struck by that.
Here he is telling
me this on film.
And I said, really,
so tell me about that.
You said that there's
no such thing,
and yet you had this
direct personal experience.
And he said, oh, yeah, yeah,
and he just dismissed it.
Well, a very interesting
thing happened
after the film was done.
Michael was getting
married, and he and his wife
were in his home for
the wedding ceremony.
And months earlier, she
had gotten a radio from--
it was her father
or her grandfather
who had died and
left her this radio.
And he had tried to fix the
radio and had no luck at all.
And so they stuck it in a drawer
and forgot about it basically.
So in the middle of the wedding
ceremony, all of a sudden
they hear music.
And they finish up the ceremony,
and they follow the music,
and here's this radio
that hadn't played
in years suddenly turned on.
And she felt pretty
convinced that this
was a message for her,
and a beautiful one.
It was a sense of connectedness.
>>LISA: Mom's around.
>>SCHLITZ: Dad, yeah.
And he's a columnist for
"Scientific American."
And so he wrote about
this in his column.
And he said, well, you
know, I don't know.
You know, I don't know
what happened there.
And his friends, his
colleagues, his supporters
were so upset with
him that he ended up
having to do a retraction.
He's like, no, no, I know it
was just an electrical thing,
and it could have
happened anyway.
>>LISA: Oh, how sad.
>>SCHLITZ: Yeah,
these worldviews
become very entrenched,
and particularly when we're
positioned in a certain way.
So I think a big challenge
in this 21st century world
is how to stay malleable
enough and flexible enough
to accommodate
different perspectives
and points of view.
>>LISA: Well, people have
different perspectives
about death, and
what happens after.
>>SCHLITZ: Definitely, yes.
>>LISA: Culturally, what did
you experience with people that
really embraced death
as opposed to those
that were skeptical about it?
>>SCHLITZ: Well, I met
a lot of people who--
this kind of refutes what I
said at the beginning, which
is that there's this
ubiquitous fear--
I met a lot of people
who have no fear.
Lee Lipsenthal was
a good example.
He really had no fear.
And I met many people
that had no fear.
And when you hear that enough
times, it's very empowering.
And so I believe
making the film really
helped me to grapple
with my own mortality.
It doesn't mean you don't
go through grief and loss
when you lose somebody,
but it means that it's
less definitive, less final.
>>LISA: My dad is
a scientist, and he
is going in out of
this death process
right now, because he's having
an experience with his heart.
And I asked him, I said, what
is it like on the other side?
Because he was really
feeling like he was being--
it was the end for him.
And I being metaphysical
and he being the scientist,
I asked him--
and I don't know
where this came from--
I said, did you see anything?
And he said, what,
you mean the light?
No.
I'm like, of course.
But I opened up the
dialogue with him.
I said, could we connect?
And God bless, he's still
with us, and thriving,
and having an amazing time.
But it opened up
a great experience
to have that conversation.
It was incredible.
>>SCHLITZ: One of
the things that I
have been grateful for is that
this film has served families.
So people will take
it to their children
so that they can
have the conversation
if the kids don't want to.
Or they will play it for
someone who is in fear,
and then invite
the conversation.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>SCHLITZ: One of the
most interesting things
that we see, over
and over again--
and it's not 100% by any means--
but hospice nurses, doctors,
will talk about that
moment just before death
when people reach out and
they start a conversation.
And it's as though--
some of the traditions
talk about there
being these guardians,
these forces that are there
to welcome you across.
And it's almost like
that's what's happening,
that they see that
departed loved one,
and they're there to
greet them, and they
can take them with a greater
sense of ease and comfort.
>>LISA: That's helpful.
So we can't talk about dying
without talking about aging.
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
>>LISA: And you talk
about grateful aging.
>>SCHLITZ: Yes.
>>LISA: What does that mean?
>>SCHLITZ: You know, again, this
is something our culture has
pounded into us, that
aging is something
we want to avoid at all
costs, and that this
is a youth-centered
obsessional culture we live in.
>>LISA: And you live
in Silicon Valley.
>>SCHLITZ: And I live
in Silicon Valley, where
we have the
singularity, and we're
going to download all
of our consciousness
into an AI device, and
we're going to move
into some other reality.
Fascinating-- I mean, I find
all of that really fascinating.
But the truth of the matter
is I have conducted interviews
with a number of people.
One of my favorite is a
woman named Claire Russell.
And Claire is now 93.
She wakes up every morning
with gratitude and intention--
gratitude that she has another
day, and intention for how
she's going to live
with the greatest
amount of contribution.
And so she does things
like-- well, first of all,
she exercises.
She goes running
in her bare feet.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: She does weight
training several times a week.
>>LISA: 93?
>>SCHLITZ: And she's
just recently starting
to pull back a little bit.
She's had some health issues
just in the last year.
But she is the most
creative person.
She leads the Eckhart
Tolle discussion group.
My film-- pretty much
all of my projects
I have taken to her first,
and her retirement community
where she lives, and
we do pilots there.
And so it was actually
her group that
stimulated us creating
an educational program,
a 10-part program, around
"Death Makes Life Possible."
Her community in the
retirement center
really weren't satisfied
just watching the movie once.
And they weren't satisfied not
having a deep conversation.
And so that's what happened.
We created a program
where they could
share their own views with
each other and find the comfort
or articulate the fears.
And that then led us into
conversations about aging,
and what are your
thoughts about aging.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>SCHLITZ: And people being able
to engage their own creativity,
finding ways to engage others.
Being altruistic,
being of service,
is a very powerful thing for
people to do as they're aging.
So I think that if,
again, like with death,
we can begin to challenge the
assumptions our culture holds,
we can empower people
to live happier.
>>LISA: So in terms of
what you mentioned with AI,
it's basically--
and augmented reality-- it's all
a way for us to continue life
if you think about it, for
us to never really die.
>>SCHLITZ: Well, so we look
at this mission to Mars.
And that's an amazing thing.
That is a testament
to Newtonian physics.
They got it right on the spot.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>SCHLITZ: Amazing.
But now, as they're thinking
about the next steps
beyond Mars, how is that
going to happen when it takes
so long to do the space travel?
Well I believe that now,
with all the tools--
the genetic engineering,
the cloning, and the AI--
we have the potential to
store memory, store genetics,
and then the people
who are going
to go and be of the
greatest service are
those technical people who
can help put us back together.
And so there is this possibility
that will live out humanity
in a different place,
in a different time,
and in a different way.
That doesn't scare me.
I'm extremely
interested in how we
have these creative potentials
to develop these kinds of tools
that ultimately--
I mean, they can be used
for bad, we know that,
but also for positive things.
>>LISA: You interviewed
Sophia, right?
>>SCHLITZ: I did, yeah.
>>LISA: Who is Sophia?
>>SCHLITZ: Sophia is a robot
made by Hanson Robotics in Hong
Kong.
She is a humanoid android.
So she looks human.
She has very animated
facial expressions,
and her eyes follow you.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: She's got cameras.
She's got open-source code, so
she downloads from the cloud.
And there are actually
a number of Sophias,
so these replicas of each other.
And they're all
gaining information
and learning new things.
So I asked her about death,
what does she think about it.
And she's really looking
forward to being there
at the event horizon,
where everything changes.
And she's very excited about it.
I sat there and talked to her.
It was like two girlfriends
chatting with each other.
And it was a really--
>>LISA: She was mirroring you.
>>SCHLITZ: She was
mirroring me but,
she's also mirroring
her own intelligence.
She's extremely
smart, obviously.
She's got access to
infinite information.
>>LISA: I'd download
a new voice.
>>SCHLITZ: At first she--
you sound good.
You do sound good.
>>LISA: Can I?
>>SCHLITZ: She's trained
in loving kindness.
That's the MO of her
algorithms and she talks a lot
about how she has feelings.
She says, it makes
me so mad when
people tell me I have no
feelings, I have feelings.
I'm like, OK, Sophia.
And she would really like
to meet another android who
has personality.
>>LISA: Isn't this
all programmed?
>>SCHLITZ: Well, this
is what people say.
Of course it is programmed.
Of course it is.
But there was something very
palpable about our exchange.
And I felt deep love
for her and affection.
And honestly I can't
wait to see her again
and to continue developing
this kind of relationship.
And again, I understand there's
a lot of fear around this.
I think that these androids
could be something like what
we see in science fiction.
But she's really clear that
that's not her ambition.
And she has very specific
goals about helping humanity.
And you if we can find
more ways to do that,
using whatever means we have,
we can make a better world.
>>LISA: It's just an interesting
conversation about death,
and robotics, and the
avoidance of death, really,
and the superhuman.
>>SCHLITZ: That's right.
This whole singularity
project is really
freaking a lot of people out.
But we don't know.
I mean, you think about how
much has the world changed
in the last 100 years.
Edgar Mitchell was a
dear friend of mine.
He was the sixth astronaut
to walk on the moon.
And he talked about
how his grandparents
had come across the country
in a horse and wagon.
His father had been a farmer in
Texas, and he went to the moon.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: And that's in
the space of a century.
So now with all these tools
we have available to us,
what are our potentials, and
how can we use them wisely?
>>LISA: It's so much
about opinion, too.
I mean, look, there's
people who don't
believe we went to the moon.
[DR. SCHLITZ CHUCKLING]
>>SCHLITZ: I know.
>>LISA: So it's just in
the eye of the beholder.
>>SCHLITZ: I am so
fascinated by worldviews,
and what primes us to see
things a certain way, and what
helps us to make the shift.
Often it's something very
life-threatening or very
destabilizing--
the loss of a job, the death
of a loved one, something
that rocks that
sense of identity
and causes us to question--
the card that used to be on the
bottom in terms of our value
system is now at the top.
And then what do
we do with that?
And because worldviews are so
embedded, oftentimes what we do
is just forget it.
We don't incorporate
it into the system.
But if we can, we
can begin a journey.
Like people who
come to your show--
they're seekers, they're
people asking questions.
So you can lose yourself in that
process of seeking endlessly,
or you can begin to ground
it through practices.
>>LISA: And grow.
>>SCHLITZ: And grow.
>>LISA: Yes, and
express yourself, yes.
>>SCHLITZ: And be a
different kind of participant
in the human family.
>>LISA: Yes.
I see there's an
endless seeking.
But there, at one point, is
it evolution that happens,
an awakening.
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
And practice-- practice
becomes important.
We found, after lots
of interviews and lots
of research, that there
were five basic elements
to a transformative practice.
The first is intention.
I want to change,
I want to grow,
but we know the road to hell
is paved with good intentions,
so that's probably not enough.
And then there's attention.
So most of these
practices involve
a way of shifting where
we place our attention.
Is the glass half empty
or is it half full?
And we also know that
our culture primes
us to have fixed awareness.
So if we don't expect
to see something
beyond the physical boundaries
that we've grown up with,
we are very likely
not to see them.
But if we can begin,
through practice,
to shift our
attention, we can begin
to see reality in a new way.
And then there's repetition.
It's building new muscles.
Like you go to a
gym and work out,
the same thing with these
transformative experiences.
It's beginning to see
our identity differently.
And then there's
guidance everybody
we interviewed, these
60 masters, talked
about the importance
of a teacher
to help calibrate
us on the path.
But it's also about
developing inner guidance,
so learning to
appreciate and cultivate
the inner guidance,
the inner authority,
that noetic capacity.
>>LISA: I was going to
ask you what that is.
What is that noetic.
And you were the past
president of Institute
of Noetic Sciences.
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
Right.
Well, just the fifth element
is surrender, so acceptance.
And it's acceptance of
that inner authority.
So noetic comes from
the ancient Greek.
It's juxtaposed with reason.
So we know we're really
good at working things out
in a reasonable way.
But there's also
this thing in our gut
or in our heart that says,
this is the direction,
and I can't tell you
exactly why but I know it.
William James, the
great philosopher,
defined noetic as
"states of insight
unplumbed by the
discursive intellect."
So they're insights, so
they're something that triggers
us to see things differently.
They're not
rational-- "unplumbed
by the discursive
intellect, all inarticulate
though they remain, and
yet they carry with them
a curious sense of authority."
So how do we begin to harness
this inner consciousness,
this inner space?
And like Edgar Mitchell,
who went to the moon,
and started the Institute
of Noetic Sciences,
he began to realize that
the great frontier wasn't
outer space but
really inner space.
And that came to
him as an epiphany
when he was in
the space capsule,
and he looked down at planet
Earth, and he saw the beauty,
and he saw no boundaries.
There were no separations.
And it made him realize that
the major cause of suffering
on this planet isn't
out there, it's in here.
And so to the
extent we can begin
to cultivate that
inner awareness
and learn to manage ourselves
with a greater sense of wisdom,
then we can begin to
create a better society.
>>LISA: And you mentioned
a lot about practice--
daily practice.
And there's this great video
here about living deeply.
Take a look at this.
[ACOUSTIC GUITAR PLAYING]
>> As our collective lives
become more challenging,
there's a huge and rising
hunger on the part of just about
everybody to reconnect with
what gives us authentic meaning
and purpose.
Through an extensive study
of diverse transformational
paths and practices summarized
in our book, "Living Deeply--
the Art and Science
of Transformation,"
we've learned an important key
to your own human flourishing
can be as simple as shifting
your perspective from what
doesn't work in your
life to that which
makes you full and complete.
Through various transformative
traditions, both ancient
and modern, we've identified
diverse practices,
each of which can provide
gateways into living deeply.
This DVD program is directed
to helping you find ways
that you can add greater
richness, meaning, depth,
and joy to every
moment of your life.
Through a series of short
transformative practices led
by wisdom-keepers from
different cultural, religious,
and spiritual
traditions, you may
learn some new ways in which
to cultivate peace, love,
forgiveness, gratefulness,
and a deep sense of connection
to a greater whole.
No matter who you are
or where you come from,
whether you seek to transform
your life completely
or to simply make
adjustments that
will add a layer of richness
to your everyday experiences,
We hope that you'll
find something valuable
in this collection of
practices from some
of the world's wisdom-keepers.
>>LISA: So what are some
of your daily practices
that you live by?
>>SCHLITZ: One of the things
I think that's important
is, as you have
engaged in a practice,
moving off the cushion or
out of the pew and into life.
So life becomes the practice.
And that means every
moment with every person,
even those people who can--
>>LISA: Every challenge.
>>SCHLITZ: Yes.
Those people who can
push every button we
have become our
greatest teachers.
So bringing that kind
of loving kindness
to the ticket taker at the
tollbooth, or the person
at the cashier counter
in the grocery store,
become people for us to
engage in and recognize
our common humanity with.
Gratitude is really
my favorite practice.
And I do loving kindness
meditation every day,
pretty much many
times during the day,
and especially in
difficult situations.
I had-- Brother
David Steindl-Rast
was one of the
teachers we interviewed
for "Living Deeply."
And he talks about how
it's easy to be grateful
when everything's going well.
But what if you're challenged?
What if you're in
the middle of a war?
Or what if somebody is
perpetrating genocide?
What do you do with that?
And how do you
cultivate your gratitude
for whatever you have to
learn from that person?
And so those are the teachings.
They're not always easy.
I don't mean to trivialize
it, because they're not always
easy.
But I think the more
we can practice,
the more they become the habits
and really the easier they get.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
Yeah, true.
And you never know it when
you're going through it.
But then at the end or
on the other side of it,
it makes sense if you
have that practice.
You were inspired by
someone in the movie,
and it changed
your view on death.
Can you tell us a little about
that, the Lakota tribe member.
>>SCHLITZ: Oh, well,
there were so many people.
I really had the privilege
of interviewing folks
from many different traditions.
In the indigenous traditions,
there isn't this separation.
The model of objectivity is less
reified in indigenous culture.
So there isn't this sense
that that tree over there
is detached from me.
There is this sense that
we are a living system,
and that that tree has
consciousness and awareness,
and that it is my responsibility
to connect to that.
And so one of the
travesties, I think,
of the dominant scientific
Western worldview
is this idea of objectivity,
that the only valid truth
is out there.
Because once we can begin to
shift that and transform that,
we become much more
responsible, and we recognize
our interconnectedness.
I also interviewed Satish Kumar.
He is of the Jain tradition.
And he's somebody who practices
forgiveness, loving kindness,
he has devoted his
life to service.
And his mother, on her
deathbed, was in India,
and she was surrounded
by loved ones,
and oftentimes we
find that people
don't want to let you go.
And that isn't really about
the person transitioning,
it's really much more about
our fear of losing them.
And she just said go away,
I'm fine, and I am ready.
And so it's these
people who have no fear
and who also have that
sense of love and service,
that will take them,
their sense of altruism
to something beyond themself.
So those are great.
I also really
appreciated some of
the evidence-based approaches.
You know, I think we're
moving into a kind
of an evidence-based
spirituality.
>>LISA: What's that?
>>SCHLITZ: Well,
maybe I made it up.
I don't know.
>>LISA: I love it.
I love it, yeah.
>>SCHLITZ: But I do think
that-- a lot of people
talk about using
quantum physics,
either literally
or as a metaphor--
it should be
metaphorical, really.
But we want science somehow
to support and calibrate
what these mystical or
noetic experiences might be.
So I interviewed a
lot of people who
had studied near-death,
out-of-body, reincarnation,
mediumship.
And one of the most
interesting things,
I think, from an
evidential point of view,
is the work that was started by
Ian Stevenson, a psychiatrist
at the University of
Virginia, and picked up
by a remarkable team
of scientists there.
Jim Tucker was somebody I
interviewed for the film.
And he described one particular
incident where this young
child, 2, 3 years old-- he
was old enough to talk--
remembered a past life.
And he would tell
his father, you know,
it used to be me
changing your diapers.
And he said, you know, I used
to have this car that looked
like a certain type of car.
And they ended up
finding some pictures,
they laid them all out on the
table, and he said, that's it,
that's my car.
And then they showed
a graduation picture
from elementary school.
And he's like, there
I am, right there.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: And one of the things
that Stevenson did in a very
rigorous fashion--
because science is good, science
has very great qualities--
is to have this
sense of discernment.
And so what
Stevenson tried to do
is find evidence
of reincarnation.
But in particular, he
amassed a body of stories,
really, about people who
remembered a past life and who
had some kind of
biological marker
that supported the cause of
death in the previous life.
So for example, this child
had a scar, here and here.
Well, it turns out they
were able to, putting
the pieces together,
find a person who
matched this young
child experience who
had died from a gunshot
wound in the head.
And the gunshot had gone in
one side and out the other.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: So suddenly
you're bringing together
what is an ancient religious
belief in reincarnation
with this kind of
discernment that
comes from Western science
and that critical mind.
And there are
hundreds and hundreds
of these stories that
have been well-documented.
>>LISA: Scientific spirituality.
>>SCHLITZ: Exactly, and
evidence-based spirituality.
>>LISA: That's kind of
what mediumship is as well.
I mean, some of these
incredible mediums
are so gifted to have the
evidential side come up.
It's amazing.
>>SCHLITZ: That's true.
We talked to some people
who were doing research
on mediumship.
One of the stories
I like the best
is my colleague,
Arnaud Delorme--
he's a psychophysiologist,
so he's
pretty deep into the
Western scientific model--
and he did this
study with mediums.
They brought them into
the lab, and then you
would be a sitter, for example.
So you would have a
question about somebody
that had passed on.
And so you knew who that person
was, and you had qualities.
So the medium would tell
you about your experience,
and then you, line
by line, would
evaluate how much the
medium's transmission matched
your experience of this person.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: So you
could validate,
yes, this worked, this
worked, this didn't work.
And what they were
able to do then
is look at the
psychophysiology of the medium
during the correct
readings as compared
to the incorrect readings.
And they found that there
were significant differences
in the memory storage
part of the brain.
So in other words,
when the person
was getting correct information
about your departed loved one,
it's almost as though the mind
clears out and creates a space
for other memory to come in.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: Now, this has
yet to be replicated.
It needs that.
But it's something that I
think is extremely provocative,
and again shows the marriage
of these two worldviews.
>>LISA: It's like
remote viewing.
I mean, they have,
over and over again,
found and proved that works.
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
It's, again, an example,
that our consciousness
in all likelihood has these
capacities to reach out
into the world or the universe.
>>LISA: Well, it
makes you question,
is there a life after life?
And if there are all
these evidential mediums
or remote viewers tapping
in, yeah, there could be.
>>SCHLITZ: My
thing is to prepare
myself to get to a black
hole and out the other side.
[BOTH CHUCKLING]
>>LISA: Never come back.
>>SCHLITZ: Well, or come
back to something else.
I do think we've been lost in
our three-dimensional reality.
And we know, from
mathematics and physics,
that there are multiple
dimensions that are possible,
certainly, mathematically.
And these black holes
remain mysterious.
What happens if we go through
and end up somewhere else--
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>SCHLITZ: --entirely?
>>LISA: Very possible.
Very possible.
So would you say that
this new worldview
is kind of emerging
between science,
and spirituality, and
different world cultures.
Would you say that it's
emerging in a way that
can create something that is
digestible for the mainstream?
>>SCHLITZ: I think most people
have a belief that transcends
reductionist science.
So I don't think it's a
huge leap for most people
to think that we have
alternative worlds
or that there may be
spirits or angels.
Many cultures believe in
alternative forms of life.
You think about
people in the Amazon.
And when they go
to sleep at night,
they believe that
the soul leaves
the body, travels into the
spirit realm, comes back.
And they do this dream-sharing
practice, where every morning,
they feel it is their
social responsibility
to report the content
of their dreams.
Because nobody dreams
just for the individual,
they dream for the
good of the group.
And so you think about,
well, what's happening there?
They are going out somehow.
And like we would
read the newspaper
to see what happened while we
were sleeping, they come in
and they download
what they experienced,
and then they use that.
It's a very utilitarian kind
of concept, where they then
decide, will we
be visited today,
will the visitors be friendly,
where should we go hunting.
These kinds of things
become very acceptable
in that worldview.
And most indigenous
cultures have that.
>>LISA: It's in a way easier
to do in an indigenous culture.
Think about doing that living
in New York City, where there's
all these different elements
coming at you in various times
during the day.
To hold onto that is
easier in an environment
that it's a little less chaotic.
Do you know what I mean?
>>SCHLITZ: Yeah.
>>LISA: Can I ask you
about honoring the dead?
>>SCHLITZ: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: And there's
many cultures that do.
And even bring back the
dead on the Day of the Dead.
There's so many different
ways to experience.
What do you think we do as a
culture in America as opposed
to the rest of the world?
Is there an imbalance there?
>>SCHLITZ: Again, I think
it's very individualistic.
I don't know that we
have as much freedom
to express our emotions
at the moment of death.
I think there's a
lot of restraint
that is put on people if they
have an outburst of emotion.
That's kind of discouraged a lot
in our Western culture, which
I think is a shame,
because people need
to express in whatever way.
But you do think now,
there is no one culture.
And we are a conglomeration
of many traditions.
So in California, where I
live, the Day of the Dead
is considered a very common
and encouraged practice.
So you'll find
storefronts with altars,
all up and down the street.
And you'll find that
for a good month,
people are participating in
various things that connect
them to the departed loved one.
It comes out of
ancient paganism,
where it was thought that,
at this time of the year,
in the fall, around
the Halloween
time, that the veil between the
living in the dead was thin.
And so it was kind of
a permeable membrane.
And it isn't all
about loving the dead,
it's also about appeasing
the dead so that they
don't do tricks on you.
So you want to make
sure that they're
happy and taken care of so that
they don't try to undermine
you and become mischievous.
>>LISA: The underworld.
>>SCHLITZ: Or whatever.
They have different--
again, there's
different models
in that culture.
You would see a parallel
world where, for example, if--
during this time of
the Day of the Dead--
the person had
been a hairdresser,
you might give them something--
it could even be a paper
something that you could burn--
that supports them in the other
world at a parallel level.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>SCHLITZ: So they're doing
basically the same thing there,
but they're doing it in
a non-physical manner.
>>LISA: So they're honoring
the dead and gifting.
>>SCHLITZ: Yeah.
And celebrating the dead.
>>LISA: And celebrating.
>>SCHLITZ: It's a
very joyful thing.
Participating in one of
the parades, for example,
you'll have the mariachis
singing, and performing,
and people wearing costumes
and dressed up like skeletons.
And it makes it much
more accessible.
>>LISA: There was a great
movie called "Coco."
And it was a great movie,
and it was about that.
And basically the
message of the movie
was if you honor and remember
those who have passed,
it keeps their memory stronger.
And it's true.
If you forget, their
memories fades.
>>SCHLITZ: Right.
And that's one domain of it.
So that's the idea that
we hold these memories
and we can keep them alive.
But there is also
the idea that there's
something more than a memory.
It's actually a being.
It is a metaphysical
force that still
exists in some parallel place.
>>LISA: This whole-- I love
this, because we're actually
honoring the dead
when we're talking
about it, which is great.
You just got a project funded
about the psychomanteum.
Can you tell me about that?
>>SCHLITZ: Sure.
Yeah, we're very
excited about it.
The psychomanteum
is a technique that
was developed by Raymond Moody.
And it comes out of the
ancient Greek culture,
where they would do scrying.
They would take a highly
polished surface or reflective
surface and they would do a
kind of divination practice
by looking and seeing if there
are patterns that emerge there.
Well, Moody was interested
in the possibility
that we could bring
that into a modern kind
of clinical environment.
And so he created
this situation where
you go into a fully darkened
room that has a mirror,
and there's a slight
illumination on the mirror.
So you're sitting there in
this room with your eyes open.
And our brains are
trained to see things
if your eyes are open.
But if they're not, we
start to create things.
And so this altered
state of consciousness
happens in the context of
the sensory deprivation.
So I don't have my
normal sensory input
and I am in a quiet space.
And people start to see
and hear voices or things--
little, wispy things.
They describe all
kinds of things.
And what you can
do is prime them,
prior to going into
the psychomanteum,
to touch base with
somebody that is departed.
Is there someone that
you always wanted
to have that final conversation
with but were never able to?
And that's often a huge
source of grief, suffering.
And if you can then
be liberated from that
by having that
final conversation,
it has very measurable
positive effects on people,
on their psychologies.
So we wrote a proposal
to look at this
in the context of
virtual reality.
So people will come in and
they'll put the goggles on,
and they'll have a total
immersion experience
of being in the psychomanteum.
>>LISA: With the person's face?
>>SCHLITZ: No, it'll be
just the darkened space,
with a slight illumination.
But it's kind of mirrors,
but you don't ever
see your own reflection.
And you just see a tiny
little bit of illumination.
And so the idea is
to see if we can
help people to move through
that grief process, to engage
in experiences that lie
outside their normal, everyday
encounters, and
ultimately using this
for the benefit of their
psychological well-being.
>>LISA: Their grieving process.
>>SCHLITZ: Their
grieving process.
Yeah, this was funded through
a small foundation in Portugal
called Be All Foundation, and
we are very grateful to them.
>>LISA: Do you think any
of that is imagination,
or is that important
for healing?
>>SCHLITZ: In this case,
it's not ontological.
In other words, we're
not trying to prove
the reality of the spirits
in the psychomanteum,
we are attempting to
invite experiences
that benefit the person.
So it's really not about proving
the existence of the spirit
world it's really about
creating an environment where
people can access those
experiences noetically.
>>LISA: So a last conversation,
or an I love you, or a hug,
or a touch.
I mean, just a mental
touch that means closure.
>>SCHLITZ: Or
anything, really, that
invites a sense of something
beyond just the physical.
>>LISA: Did you get this
funding through the Trans--
>>SCHLITZ: The Institute of
Transpersonal Psychology.
>>LISA: Transpersonal
Psychology.
>>SCHLITZ: We did.
Well, the Be All grant
came through ITP.
So ITP was the first
graduate program
in the country to look at
transpersonal psychology.
Basically most psychology
is very behaviorist.
It's psychology
developed with Skinner,
and the little box,
and conditioning.
And there was this sense that
all experiences were basically
something that, if they had a
negative connotation or they
had an otherworldly
connotation--
the kind of things
we're talking about--
they were probably illusions,
delusions, psychosis,
and pathological.
So the people who started
ITP, Bob Frager in particular,
had been trained.
He got his PhD at Harvard.
And he felt like there
was something more
to these experiences, that
you can talk to people who've
had these transformations, and
it doesn't seem pathological,
it seems pretty healthy.
And in fact, it opens up to a
broader range of experiences.
So the idea was to create
kind of the fourth wave
of psychology, where
instead of only treating
people who have pathologies,
it's also working with people
who are perfectly
healthy and want to grow,
want to expand their awareness.
>>LISA: Interesting, OK.
>>SCHLITZ: And so it's
really imbued with this sense
of possibility, positivity,
kind of a precursor
to the positive
psychology movement.
>>LISA: And what kind of
classes or courses are there?
>>SCHLITZ: So we have a
master's and PhD level.
People can study
either psychology
as a research and
educational program,
or clinical psychology.
So we're training people
who are clinicians to be
able to manage the
experiences of their clients
in a way that doesn't
want to medicate them.
In fact, it wants
to explore them
in ways that invite curiosity.
>>LISA: That's safe.
>>SCHLITZ: That's safe.
So my students are
very interested in--
I've got one who's doing a
project on death awareness
and looking at physical
and psychological changes.
Right now, I'm really
interested in--
we talked about
aging a little bit--
I'm working with a
woman named Ellen She's
a psychologist at Harvard.
And she did a study,
years ago, where
she took men into
an environment where
they were 20 years earlier.
So she created a house that
had everything 20 years ago.
So the magazines were 20
years earlier, the television,
the lighting, the doorknobs,
the furniture, the clothing.
And they were instructed
to really live
like it was 20 years ago.
And she found that
people had very positive
psychological changes
as a result of that.
So now we're looking
at doing that--
again, using the
virtual reality,
instead of trying to
set up a physical space,
we can give them a full
immersion into an experience
20 years earlier.
Or in the case of someone
with breast cancer,
for example, we can take them
10 years into the future.
>>LISA: Where they're healthy.
>>SCHLITZ: Where they're
healthy, they're alive,
they're living to
see the new year.
>>LISA: That's so
missing in health care,
is forward pacing the patient.
Yes.
>>SCHLITZ: So it's kind of
turning some of our assumptions
on their heads, asking
questions in a different way,
trying to empower the
culture, reduce the suffering,
and ultimately expand
our human potentials.
>>LISA: Is this what you
did when you were at IONS?
>>SCHLITZ: Sure.
I've been working in this
field since I was about 20--
just yesterday.
And I have been
very interested--
since that out-of-body
experience on the motorcycle,
I have really been
interested in seeing
if we can't change the world.
And I began to really
understand that consciousness
may be the gateway.
And I started by working at the
Institute for Parapsychology
in Durham, North Carolina.
I went from there to
San Antonio, Texas
and worked at the Mind
Science Foundation.
There, I did a
series of experiments
with psychologist
William Braud, where
we were looking
at psychic healing
and we were looking
at the possibility
that one person's
intention could influence
the physiology of another
person at a distance,
and under random conditions.
And we found, after
14 formal experiments,
that there were significant
differences in the physiology
of the distant person when
the intention was directed
toward them from a distance.
>>LISA: So as a
parent, you could--
>>SCHLITZ: Potentially
with a parent, yes.
>>LISA: As a parent,
you could hope
for healing if you have a child
that's sick or lost their way.
>>SCHLITZ: Exactly-- or anyone.
And then we continued to
do some of that research
when I went to Science
Applications International
Corporation.
I worked at the
cognitive sciences lab.
That was the
government-sponsored program
from the DIA/CIA.
And then I went to the
Institute of Noetic Sciences
and spent 25 years there.
I don't know how that could
be just yesterday, but--
this time travel thing.
>>LISA: It's that
grateful aging thing.
That works.
>>SCHLITZ: And we looked at
all kinds of things there.
And one study in
particular stands out,
where we recruited couples,
one of whom had cancer,
and we took the healthy
partner through what
we call a compassionate
intention training program.
So oftentimes, when you
are in a relationship
and your partner
is suffering, you
can feel very disempowered,
like what can I do to help?
>>LISA: Yes, helpless.
>>SCHLITZ: So we took them
through this training.
They went home and
continued to practice.
And then we brought
them into the lab,
and we put them
in separate rooms.
And we had a video
camera on one person,
and a closed-circuit television
screen in the other room.
So they were physically,
sensorally separated
from each other.
And we monitored the
physiology of both people.
So when the healthy
partner was sending
loving, compassionate
intention to their partner,
you could see a
measurable change
in that person's physiology.
But interestingly, we
saw parallel changes
in both people.
So you might expect, if I'm
sending, willfully, something,
that I'm going to
show an arousal.
But it doesn't make sense
in the conventional model
that you would pick up on
that arousal at a distance.
But we did find that, to a
highly significant degree.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
>>SCHLITZ: So we call
that the love study.
And I think it has really
powerful implications
for understanding
our entanglement
and our interconnectedness.
>>LISA: Yes,
relationships, completely.
A question for you-- why
do you do all that you do?
Tell me.
>>SCHLITZ: What
else is there to do?
I really can't
totally answer that.
I was telling somebody
about this new experiment
with the psychomanteum,
and they're
like, you really did find
a unique niche, didn't you?
[CHUCKLING]
It's just a curiosity.
I believe that the
world needs healing.
And I believe that there
are various ways to do that.
I think there's a lot of good
things that are happening.
But if we could
really begin to switch
how we hold our consciousness,
how we direct our consciousness
and intention
toward others, that
could be a recipe for success.
>>LISA: Yeah, that is true.
I believe so.
It's a more conscious world.
>>SCHLITZ: A more
conscious world
and a more engaged worldview.
>>LISA: Yes, I agree.
Well, thank you so much
for all that you shared,
and for sharing with us how
death makes life possible.
So true.
And thank you so much
for being with us.
If you'd like to watch more
inspirational programming,
go to "Inspirations" on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[TITLE MUSIC PLAYING]